README.md, before:

# kentico-contrib

KenticoContrib is a playground/sandbox for developing an approach to building Kentico v12 MVC sites. The primary goals of this repository are to:

1. Act as a learning tool for its author
2. Act as a repository for reusable modules developed and extracted from the sample code and contributed to the Kentico community for use in other projects

KenticoContrib will likely be in a perpetual state of a "work in progress", with no particular roadmap, for as long as it continues to meet its stated goals.

## Getting started

Please feel free to clone and browse the source code. The Kentico solution has been developed on a free license and should you want to set it up you will need a database backup to restore. There isn't currently a backup located anywhere to download, but please raise an issue should you want it!

## Modules

To date the following modules have been developed for release:

* [Meeg.Kentico.ContentComponents](src/Meeg.Kentico.ContentComponents)

Commit message:

Update readme files
To bring inline with devnet submission requirements.

README.md, after:

# kentico-contrib

KenticoContrib is a playground/sandbox for developing an approach to building Kentico v12 MVC sites. The primary goals of this repository are to:

1. Act as a learning tool for its author
2. Act as a repository for reusable modules developed and extracted from the sample code and contributed to the Kentico community for use in other projects

## Modules

To date the following modules have been released:

* [Meeg.Kentico.ContentComponents](src/Meeg.Kentico.ContentComponents)

## Contributing

Please feel free to clone and browse the source code. Development tools and minimum requirements are as [documented by Kentico](https://docs.kentico.com/k12sp/installation/system-requirements#Systemrequirements-Developmenttools).

The Kentico solution has been developed on a free license and should you want to fully set it up you will need a database backup to restore. There isn't currently a backup located anywhere to download, but please raise an issue should you want it!

## Issues

Questions, bugs etc for the sample site and any modules contained within should be raised on the issues board in GitHub.

## License

Licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
